Testing, one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
In other words, you don't have to talk loud.
This is April the 10th, and we're in the library room of Clayton Williams Building, and I have the honor and pleasure of chatting with Charlie Thomas for many years, the splendid track coach here at Texas A&M.
To introduce yourself,
to someone would listen to this tape or to read the transcription.
Give a biographical sketch of Charlie Thomas, where was he born, grew up, went to high school, what did mom and dad do?
And then where'd you go to college and what'd you do there?
Just tell us as much as you can about Charlie Thomas before getting to A&M.
Okay, Charlie Thomas, the history of the coach at Texas A&M from 1959 to 1970.
Jim Meyers, who was the Athletic Director and Head Football Coach at Texas A&M, hired me a young 27-year-old coach out of East Texas State College and Commerce.
East Texas State had won the last three Lone Star Conference Track and Field Championships, and this was my first time to receive
a telephone call from Texas A&M University.
They were offering me the job or come down to visit to be wanting to know if I would be interested in coaching track and being the assistant trainer at Texas A&M.
Of course that's a big step going from East Texas State which is in the Lone Star Conference into Texas A&M Southwest Conference so I said of course.
So I came down and visited and they offered me the job and I took it.
Let's see.
This is the only time we'll ask about money.
What was the beginning salary?
It was like at East Texas State, I think I was getting $4,300 a year, $4,300 a year.
And when I came to A&M, I got a big raise from $43,000
to 47,000.
I'm going to give you my history about.
But growing up.
Right.
Well, I'll just start talking.
I was born in 1931 in Foster, Texas, a little sawmill town between Cut and Chute and Cleveland.
It's 18 miles from Conroe.
I was born on a big dining room table.
inside the kitchen there at Foster Lumber Company, Foster, Texas.
Of course, I started playing athletics and we didn't have a high school there.
Ninth grade, they ran a school bus through this little sawmill town, one to Cleveland, which was a Class A school, and then one to Splendora, which was a Class B school.
And Splendora was seven miles away, so I chose to go to Splendora.
All right, of course there we played six men football and had an outdoor basketball court.
We didn't have a basketball court.
But anyway, I won the track meets
three straight years in the 220 yard dash.
I never lost a race.
Who coached you?
Roy Seegers, a guy named Seegers.
Seegers, S-E-A-G-E-R-S.
He was a senior, he was later on.
My first three years I went to Splendora and then they ran that school bus through the town and we had a group would go to Cleveland and a group would go to Splendora.
There was a girl getting on the bus going to Cleveland and I started going with this girl when I was a junior.
So my senior year I decided to transfer and go to Cleveland, be with my girlfriend.
At the same time, Conroe High School was recruiting me to go play football and go to school in Conroe, which was a 2A school.
That 2A school was old days, it was a 5A school now.
so I'd been recruited but Cleveland High School would also recruit me so I had Conroe and Cleveland recruit me to go to their high school and finish up and play football and basketball but anyway I transferred and went to Cleveland because of this girl and her name was Cecil Thigpen and her first name Cecil C-E-C-I-L and her daddy was the principal of that little
junior high school there in Foster.
So anyway, I went to Cleveland and I won state again and
in track and field and ended up, then the next year I got offers to go to all these different schools and I accepted the University of Texas, Texas A&M with us after a minute, a bunch of schools after a minute because everything's a long story.
I could talk all day just on a few little bitty items.
Anyway, I went to the University of Texas and I got married after my freshman, well my girlfriend, her name was Cecil.
I had the University of Texas recruiting me real heavy, Texas A&M recruiting me real heavy.
So the baseball coach, the All-American baseball coach in Huntsville, Texas,
I can't remember his name, but he's been there a long time and he had sons that come up and coached there in Conroe.
But anyway, they were University of Texas graduates.
This baseball coach from Huntsville's wife came over and took me and my girlfriend out for dinner and talked about us going to the University of Texas.
So when it comes time to visit, this lady from Huntsville comes over and picks up me and my girlfriend.
I'm saying a lot of this because I learned fast how to recruit.
And then when I first got the job at Texas A&M, my number one item was to recruit the best guys you can get if you're going to have a championship team.
But anyway, they put us up in the hotel.
In those days, little things like that wouldn't violate the rules.
So I didn't think anything about it.
But later on, I signed and went to
to University of Texas.
And then after my first year, we get married, which is the same girl.
My girl went to Texas, too, as a freshman, but didn't anybody pay her.
There wasn't anything illegal about that.
But anyway, we get married, and then I ran track there for four years.
And the only track meet that I missed, a University of Texas
was coming to Texas A&M.
We had a triangle meat at A&M with rice A&M in Texas and that was standard for many years back in those days.
The only track meat I missed in four years of running was that one because my daughter Patricia Ann was born that Saturday morning.
And Friday night, I was up all Friday night, and at 7 o'clock Saturday morning, the baby was already morning, so I called down in the hospital, and I called Coach Clyde Littlefield and tell him the story, and he knew my wife was pregnant.
He said, that's all right, that's all right.
So anyway, I missed that track meet here at A&M, and that was the only one I missed while I was running.
And then later on, I go to get a coaching job.
Now, when you were an undergraduate at the University of Texas, what did you hope to become?
What was your... All right.
What started me out as being a coach was a trainer, Frank Medina.
He was an Indian, old-timey trainer, and every school had great trainers.
I mean, he'd been there for years.
Texas A&M had great trainers, Rice and SMU.
Every school had these real good trainers.
We'd go to track mates in high school,
One of these trainers would come and look me up to give me a rub down and all that stuff.
I didn't know it, but they would recruit me.
Rice trainer would come over and recruit me and give me a rub down.
He would talk about how great the Rice team was and I didn't realize it.
I was just a high school kid running.
Oh, I forgot what we were.
Well, and then when you graduated, did you graduate to East Texas?
Oh, yeah.
All right.
Frank Medina, the trainer at Texas, came up and talked to me and Dean Smith, and Dean Smith was my roommate and ran on the relay team with me.
He said, if you've got to start now, we were sophomores, and learn and be student trainers, he said, when you graduate, he said, I feel pretty sure I can get you a big job in the pros.
in the pros or a major college being a trainer because he said, University of Texas is one of the very few schools that are training athletic trainers.
He said, you can't go to any other school and be an athletic trainer.
But you come here, we'll train you and get you pass a test and get your certificate and be a qualified trainer.
So anyway, we started doing that.
I remember way back there, we'd go to the Kansas Relays, go to the Drake Relays, go to the Penn Relays in a train.
Two days up there and two days back, or a day and a night in a train.
The trainer would take cases of tape, I mean four or five cases of tape, a two-inch tape, and we'd have to tape practice all the way up there and all the way back.
And I got to where I could take two ankles in a minute and a half.
I mean, to be a big time trainer, you had to turn out a football player.
You had to tape their ankles like a cast where they couldn't break it, especially in the pros, I mean.
But anyway, then when I graduated from Texas, the athletic director at Texas was from A&M, came from A&M, and he was coached at A&M at one national championship.
DX Bible.
All right.
DX Bible was athletic director at Texas.
And he called me up in the office and said, he said, East Texas State is looking for a new, looking for a head track coach and head trainer and you're qualified.
So do you want the job?
I said, yeah, I don't have a job.
So that was my fifth year.
When was that?
That was actually my fifth year.
So that's the spring of when?
Fifty, fifty, four, fifty-five.
Fifty-five.
My senior year was 1954 and it took me five years to get my degree and I went back and I was a full-time athletic trainer and see when I was a trainer, I mean when I was a student trainer during track season I couldn't be a trainer too much but other time I'd basketball game football games I'd work as a trainer
So you and your wife and how many children by then?
Just had one.
You and the wife and daughter moved to Commerce.
Moved to Commerce.
And you were there how long?
And we were there three years.
Three years.
You get this call.
Do you know who recommended you down here?
Yes, Bobby Rogers.
All right, Bobby Rogers was a basketball coach at East Texas State.
When I graduated and got my first job, I go up there, and Bobby Rogers is at East Texas State, and he had won some games or some conference championships, and A&M hired him.
I mean, I met, he was there up to my last year.
And when he went to A&M, I think Bobby Rogers was at Texas A&M one year under Jim Myers.
And Jim Myers had just got here from Iowa, I think.
Iowa State.
And they were, he asked Bobby Rogers, you know any track coaches around?
He said, I got to hire a track coach and I need one combination trainer.
And Bob said, man, I know the guy.
I know the guy at East Texas State.
Said he's the head trainer and he's the head track coach.
He's qualified and he's got a reputation in track, you know.
Because I had run nine, I didn't tell you this, but I ran nine straight years.
and never lost a race in the state of Texas in a 220 yard dash.
I'd get second or third or get beat when I'd go to the Nationals or some big, but anyway, I had a pretty good reputation around.
220 was your best race, but you also ran 100 and sometimes 400, didn't you?
Yeah, and sometimes low hurdles, 220 low hurdles.
But anyway, I got the job here at A&M.
Did you come down here for an interview?
Yes, I came down for an interview, me and my wife.
Describe that.
Well, it was over in Jim Meyers' house.
Jim Meyers is the one that called me.
And he had a big fancy house.
And I did commerce.
I had a little old rent, a little bitty small house, you know, just making it.
Came down here and saw Jim Meyers' great house.
And he had all the coaches.
And he had a house full of people.
I mean, it was a lot of people there.
And I didn't know anybody but Bobby Rogers.
I knew Bobby Rogers.
He was A&M's head basketball coach.
And we just sat around and talked.
And then the next day, he took me down and took me and met Smokey Harper and met a lot of people around.
And then they asked me a few questions.
And the main question was, can you recruit?
And I said, well, that's about all I've been doing in these tactics.
I've recruited.
So that's kind of what got me the job.
Also, I'm wondering, did Rogers bring with him a young assistant coach?
Well, no.
Yeah, he hired Shelby Metcalfe.
But Shelby, the deal was Shelby was coaching over there in East Texas on the river.
A little bitty town.
Yeah, a little bitty town.
See, Rogers sent me over there
talk to Shelby about something.
I forget what it was.
I think we were recruiting somebody.
But I go to this little town and finally had to go to the high school and I said, where's Shelby?
He said, Shelby.
I said, yeah, the basketball court.
Oh, he said, that's catfish.
That's catfish.
Metcalfe.
Catfish Metcalfe.
And Shelby spent all his time on the river fishing.
He was a big river fisherman.
So I go down and I meet, I go down to the river and that's where I first met Shelby Metcalf is on the river while he was fishing.
When, either when you were interviewed or when you first got here, did anybody give you any directions, any guidelines, any rules about being a track coach here?
Well, Bones Irving was, he was, you know, assistant athletic director.
He was the head athletic director, and every time he'd move up, be the head athletic director, and when the coach come in, he'd move back down to the system, but he was running the program.
He was the ruling body of the
of Texas A&M in all sports.
He was a business manager of what he was, but he was assistant athletic director and business manager and all that stuff.
This was before they hired Wally Gross.
And I remember I went in there and the first thing he told me, he said, here's how much money you can spend.
On breakfast, you can spend two dollars.
And on lunch, you can spend two and a half.
And on supper, you can spend three dollars.
He said, it doesn't matter how many you take, but you can't spend over that.
And he said, you have a limit of 16 full scholarships.
And he said, you can divide it up any way you want to.
In those days, you'd go out like a pole vaulter.
If he was a 13-foot pole vaulter, you'd try to get him for books and tuition.
And you'd take one scholarship and recruit
four or five guys and and that's how how it was but he said you have 16 scholarships well after about two or three years i was wondering how texas and rice and them were doing so good and i went in there and i said bones i said how many scholarships does uh texas have he said they have uh 30 31 or 33. i said what he said yeah i said how many rice have he said oh they have 28
I said, and I have 16.
He said, yeah.
He said, but you've got more than everybody else.
He said, you've got more than Baylor.
Baylor has about 10 or 11.
SMU and TCU don't have but six or seven.
Arkansas's got about six or seven.
He said, just between me and you, I said, don't ever tell nobody this.
Just between you and I, we don't expect you to get any hired in third place in the Southwest Conference because we don't have enough money to do that.
So, I mean, you talk about being quite, I never mentioned that to Ted Nelson or nobody.
I mean, if we couldn't win with what we had, I mean, it was just bad luck.
So that's one thing you had to do.
I mean, you had to really figure out your scholarship, so many for how much you're going to spend on each event.
See, here's the difference between track and football or basketball.
You go to a track meet in olden days or any track meet, you can take 108 men on your track team and all 108 can score a point.
In basketball, you've only got five that can score.
But in track, I figured it out.
I mean, you know, six events, you can take six different people just for the mile run, and all six of them can score a point.
It's very good enough.
So numbers mean a lot in track and field, but they have to be good numbers.
you said they gave you some about spending.
Was there anything about where you could go and couldn't go, about partying, about drinking, smoking?
Yeah, we, first place, he said, now you can only fly in one plane trip visit per year.
In other words, if you invite somebody from California to come down here to try out,
I said, you better sign him because you can't do it again.
So I went all those years with only invite one guy to fly in.
So that was one reason that most everybody we recruited in those days was, you know, within driving distance where they could go back and forth because we didn't have enough money to be flying.
And then when we flew to a track meet, I mean, we had to really limit it because, like, if you go to the Kansas Relays, you know, you're going to spend $7,000, $8,000, $10,000.
And I don't see how they're doing it nowadays.
I mean, they're taking everywhere they go.
They have to fly and spend the night, and it costs money.
For instance, Washington, the track coach at Washington was a real good friend of mine.
He had a real good program.
And for about 10 straight years, he'd call down there and offer me $5,000.
And that's the way they do these.
Even Texas Relays would give you money.
Drake Relays would give you money.
Yeah, to come to their meet, they'd give you money.
And that's the main reason everybody would go to Drake in Texas and Penn Relay because they'd give you a check about $3,000, $4,000, you know, to help you pay for your expenses.
But anyway, Washington, that's way up there, you know, University of Washington.
They offered me $5,000 just to come up for a dual or a triangle track meeting.
And boy, I wanted to go so bad, and I figured, well, it cost about $15,000 to make the trip.
I'd go in there and say, Bone, I need $10,000.
Oh, just forget that.
He said, you can get in a school bus and you can drive over to Rice, and Rice is just as good as Washington.
That was the DLC.
I mean, why do you want to spend all the $10,000 to go have a track meeting in Washington when you can go to University of Houston?
See, there are three schools in Houston that are just as good.
You got Texas Southern, you got Rice, you got University of Houston, then you got Lamar, and then you got
Prairie View A&M, you got five schools right there in one whack that's as good as anywhere in the United States.
So that was kind of standard, you know, and to charter a bus, it would cost us $500 or $600 to get a Greyhound, but you know, we wasn't about to go on no school bus.
I mean, we were middle class, big time.
When you first got here, describe the track facilities.
Okay.
I was a little shocked because at A&M everything was homemade.
I mean they had hurdles, all the hurdles were homemade and they were heavy and they were bad shape.
I mean they were good hurdles but they were, they wasn't light and if you hit one of them it would, you'd hurt a leg or something you know.
And the pole vault pit was all, they had a big mound made, you probably have seen that.
That was good.
I mean they had a big dirt mound made and they filled it up with sawdust.
But the deal was, everybody was getting these foam rubber pits, you know.
But anyway, the track, of course, they were all cinder track in those days.
But A&M had, they had gone in there and put oil.
Colonel Andy did that, Frank Anderson, and that was pretty good.
That made the cinder track more like an all-weather track because if it rained, it didn't mess it up.
But some of the track...
I had more cinder.
Some I was real dusty and some I was real hard.
And see, that was one of my jobs my first seven or eight years here.
Every day, about one o'clock, I'd go out there and hook up the tractor and drag the track and get it perfect.
And then we had a homemade deal with nails sticking in it.
We'd hook that to the tractor and drag it around.
It'd cut a lane in the track and that marked off your lane so you could practice your relays on the turn and so forth.
Well, this was, and the track in those days was inside.
Inside Kyle Field, uh-huh.
Was it six lanes all the way around?
No, it was eight lanes.
It was eight lanes.
It was a good track.
And a straightaway of what length?
That straightaway, 220, 220 yards straightaway.
And all of the field event locations were in the end zone?
No, there wasn't anything.
The shot put, no, they were all on the outside.
They were all behind the scoreboard, the shot and discus and everything.
And broad jump?
It was on the inside.
The pole vault and long jump was inside.
And we didn't have a triple jump then, but later on we did.
When you arrived,
Were you following Colonel Andy immediately?
Yes, uh-huh.
Well, Colonel Andy had retired.
He was out one year.
And the reason he told me, I mean I should say this, but Colonel Andy told me the reason I retired, he said I just couldn't put up with this football anymore.
Barry Bryant had come in and they had a lot of rules on football and he said they run me out of business.
Yeah, he had been gone a year, and Ray Putman was the associate track coach.
He was a full-time economics professor, and he didn't want the job.
In fact, they didn't pay him much, and then after
When I came in, I didn't even know about Ray.
I started coaching and everything.
Later on, he came up and talked to me.
When I found out all about Ray, I invited him and said, you want to help me coach?
He said, yes, I'd love to do that.
So I said, okay, you're the head cross-country coach.
This was after, I coached a couple years.
And anyway, he was my assistant coach for two or three years before, well, all the way up until I hired Ted Nelson.
And he, yeah, he was.
So Putnam did the distances.
Yes, he was coaching cross-country and distances.
Let's go back to Colonel Andy.
Describe him as much as you can.
We don't know much about him.
Colonel Indy was a great athlete because I remember way after he retired, he had marked off a bottom, he was a golfer, and he cleared a whole four or five golf
out in the woods.
He bought this little place out in the woods and he made a golf court out of it for about five holes.
He did it all by himself.
He'd climb up in those trees and cut the limbs out and all this and that.
Frank Anderson was a great field event coach.
He dominated the field events.
When I got the job at Texas NM, I knew all about Frank Anderson.
And I met him when, in fact, he tried to recruit me.
And I had Frank Anderson trying to recruit me to come to A&M.
And the main reason I went to the University of Texas was because Texas had the sprinters, A&M had the filament guy.
And go back on that story about
I met Dean Smith.
Well, Dean Smith and I, we were running all the big high school meets our junior and senior year.
Well, I would win all the 100-yard dashes and two 20-yard dashes until I run into Dean.
Well, we'd go to a big track meet where Dean would win the 100 and I'd get second.
I'd win the 200 and he'd get second.
So we made real good friends battling each other.
And then we went to the
Charlie Parker was a senior at Texas and he ran a 19 flat and a 220 with a wind behind his back and I thought it was
He looked to me like he was God.
I mean, he was so smooth, and when I found that, when I saw that Texas, when he came across the finish line, I saw that Texas, and Dean Smith and I was sitting there, and we both right there said, we better go to Texas.
When Charlie Parker ran across the finish line, he said, we better go to Texas.
We shook hands right there.
It wasn't because I didn't know anything about Texas, and I didn't know anything about A&M.
I never, you know.
We were down a little rate up.
But Dean, we were the two best sprinters.
We knew if we got together, we could win a lot of relay races, you know.
So that's the main reason we decided to go to Texas.
But anyway, when I came to A&M, I met Colonel Andy.
Boy, Colonel Andy was great.
And the first thing I did when I recruited, well, he had some good shot putters in my senior year.
He had shot putters and discus throwers that was winning.
So I got real familiar with how to coach, you know.
And then as soon as when I started recruiting Randy Mattson, I mean, that was my selling point.
I got Colonel Frank Anderson there to help you, and I had Danny Roberts, you know.
But anyway, I'd get Colonel Andy to come out and help me coach discus.
And I'd come out there and stand for an hour and watch him coach the discus and the shot put.
What were his coaching techniques?
The main thing is everything just had to be perfect.
Your shoulders had to be square, you know, and when you threw, you had to have your arm at a certain distance and certain heights and so forth.
I learned a lot from Colonel Andy.
I made a pledge to myself when I first got this job that I was going to try to keep up
So I used, now I think that's kind of like a stepping stone.
So I used, see Daryl Hooper was a senior.
All right, Daryl Hooper came to Faustory.
and Darryl Hooper and his wife came to foster and recruited me to come to A&M, Colonel Andy, and sent him down there.
That didn't dawn on me very much.
If A&M had a good sprinter and sent him down there, that would have made a lot of difference, but A&M, Southwest Conference, Olympic champion or whatever he was to recruit me, that didn't make me want to go to A&M, in other words.
because I wasn't going to be throwing a shot to it.
Anyway, Colonel Andy was a great coach.
Was he soft-spoken?
Yes, real kind.